From:	Greg Harper [gharper@albemarle.org]
Sent:	Monday, August 06, 2012 3:49 PM
To:	Martin Johnson
Subject:	RE: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown

The discharge point is across Hwy 29 from the Doubletree in the Riverside Shopping Center (includes 
Rhett’s river Grill and Raw Bar if you know where that it).

From: Martin Johnson [mailto:martin.johnson@tjswcd.org]  
Sent: Monday, August 06, 2012 3:31 PM 
To: Greg Harper 
Subject: RE: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown

Is this near Sam’s Club and the Doubletree Hotel on 29 North?

From: Greg Harper [mailto:gharper@albemarle.org]  
Sent: Monday, August 06, 2012 9:20 AM 
To: Martin Johnson 
Subject: RE: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown

I’ve attached a map depicted an approximation of the watershed draining to the culvert.  

How does the following sound?

*	enter the report into the IDDE database
*	contact Analytics Laboratory to get the supplies you need to collect a sample to test for things 
that might cause foam (detergents)
*	in the meantime, see if the culvert is even accessible on foot from the Riverside Shopping 
Center
*	return whenever you’re in the area to determine if the water regularly looks foamy
*	grab a sample when you do see foam
*	drive through the watershed (including behind shops) to see if you can easily find the source

Let me know if you have time for any of this.

Thanks,
Greg


From: Martin Johnson [mailto:martin.johnson@tjswcd.org]  
Sent: Thursday, August 02, 2012 11:23 AM 
To: Greg Harper 
Subject: RE: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown

I’ve read it. What’s next?

From: Greg Harper [mailto:gharper@albemarle.org]  
Sent: Thursday, August 02, 2012 8:37 AM 
To: Martin Johnson 
Subject: FW: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown

Martin,

Interested in doing some IDDE reconnaissance related to a complaint about foamy discharge?  The 
DEQ, JRA, and ACSA have already been involved.

Read the email thread below and then we can chat about a proper course of action.

Thanks,
Greg

From: Tim Brown [mailto:tbrown@serviceauthority.org]  
Sent: Wednesday, August 01, 2012 4:18 PM 
To: Greg Harper 
Subject: RE: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown

Greg,

No apologies needed on the delay. I had planned to make the RRSEP meeting last 
Thursday up to my arrival on Thursday morning, and a few items took precedence.

I appreciate your looking into this situation, and totally agree that if it drains 100 acres, 
it will be a challenge to find the discharger. No, I have no information on the canoeist 
who first reported seeing the foam. I received a phone message and the follow-up e-
mail (below) from Ted Turner of the DEQ to start the process. Someone mentioned the 
possibility of a fund-raising carwash going on in the vicinity, but the foam was seen on 
at least two occasions (the canoeist and the DEQ personnel).  

Note that Jennifer Welcher will be your DEQ contact, and Pat Calvert of the James 
River Association wished to receive updates. I would also be interested to hear of your 
sleuthing abilities! 

Thanks much,

Tim

From: Greg Harper [mailto:gharper@albemarle.org]  
Sent: Wednesday, August 01, 2012 3:36 PM 
To: Tim Brown 
Subject: RE: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown

Tim,

Sorry about my delay … thought I’d see you at last week’s RRSEP meeting and then let it fall off my 
radar.

I just got my hands on some old plans for the Riverside Shopping Center.  The storm sewer discharging 
at that location has been there a long time, is big (60-inch), and serves a large watershed (about 100 
acres), crossing Hwy 29.  I’m not sure exactly how the storm sewer system is all connected – we have 
only spotty data.  It will be challenging to figure out what is causing the foam and where it’s coming 
from, given the size of the watershed.  I don’t think VDOT is necessarily responsible since the source is 
almost certainly a private property and the VDOT portion of the system would only be passing through 
the pollutant.

I’ll take responsibility for looking into this since it’s a possible illicit discharge and it’s in the County.  I’ll 
work with Martin at the TJSWCD.

Do you have any contact info on the person reporting the discharge?  Do they want to be informed of 
any findings?

Greg

From: Tim Brown [mailto:tbrown@serviceauthority.org]  
Sent: Wednesday, August 01, 2012 1:17 PM 
To: Greg Harper 
Subject: FW: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown

Greg,

Have you caught up enough to have time to address this situation? 

First of all, a slight correction…the foamy discharge is not right behind Rhett’s but 100 
meters from the bridge, at the east end of that strip mall. 

It appears that stormwater may come across 29 from the Brown Automotive complex, 
and someone here mentioned the possibility of their involvement. However, their car 
washing discharge(s) should go through oil/water separators to our sanitary sewer.

I guess my general question is…who is responsible for figuring this out??  

Thanks,

Tim

From: Tim Brown [mailto:tbrown@serviceauthority.org]  
Sent: Tuesday, July 17, 2012 10:31 AM 
To: Greg Harper (gharper@albemarle.org) 
Subject: FW: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown

Greg,

Please review the following e-mail chain. 

In summary, a canoeist recently observed a foamy discharge in the Rivanna River 
behind Rhett’s restaurant on Rt. 29 N, and contacted the DEQ. The DEQ visited the 
site and found some foamy discharge from a 5’ diameter storm drain, saw the Wilco 
Hess carwash nearby, and asked us to investigate. Our CCTV crew showed the 
carwash was discharging to our sanitary system. I relay this to DEQ and said we could 
do some dye testing of our customers (especially restaurants) in the vicinity. The DEQ 
passes this info onto the James River Association, and now they are asking me for 
update, and whether we have taken any samples (we never said we would take 
samples, and have no intention to do so).

We are in that wonderful gray area of stormwater responsibility where our water/sewer 
customers are in the vicinity, you hold the permit and oversee stormwater in the 
County, and the system is owned by VDOT. I am hoping to find plans to show how big 
an area this system drains. 

Dye testing of more than a very few businesses would be a very time-consuming effort, 
and we have no indication at this point if it is illegal discharge by any one of our 
customers. 

Could you provide me with your thoughts on this situation? Is it ultimately VDOT’s 
responsibility if they are the owner of the system?

Thanks much.

Tim   



From: Pat Calvert [mailto:pcalvert@jrava.org]  
Sent: Tuesday, June 26, 2012 8:53 AM 
To: Turner, Robert (DEQ); tbrown@serviceauthority.org 
Subject: RE: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown

Thanks, Ted.
 
Tim, Please keep me apprised of what you find. I appreciate your time & attention.
 
Pat Calvert
Upper James RIVERKEEPER®
James River Association
(434) 964-7635
pcalvert@thejamesriver.org

 
From: Turner, Robert (DEQ) [mailto:Robert.Turner@deq.virginia.gov] 
Sent: Tue 6/26/2012 6:58 AM 
To: Pat Calvert 
Subject: FW: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown
Hi Pat;
 
Below is the result of Tim Brown’s investigation so far over at Albemarle Co. Service Authority.  It 
appears that the issue isn’t with the car wash.   It will be interesting to see the results of any of the 
dye testing they perform.  I’ll keep you appraised of additional information as it becomes available.
 
Take care,
 
Ted
 
From: Tim Brown [mailto:tbrown@serviceauthority.org]  
Sent: Friday, June 22, 2012 5:12 PM 
To: Turner, Robert (DEQ) 
Cc: Welcher, Jennifer (DEQ); Kain, Donald (DEQ); Flory, Gary (DEQ); pgorham@serviceauthority.org 
Subject: RE: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown
 
Ted/Jennifer,
 
One of the ACSA CCTV crews filmed the Wilco Hess carwash lateral and did not see any 
evidence of wastewater from the facility being discharged to the storm sewer system. I have 
these pictures on file if you should have interest to see them.
 
There are a few restaurants in the shopping center that could possibly have been the source of the 
soapy water, but we have no knowledge of any of them discharging illegally. We will likely 
schedule some dye testing of these facilities in the near future, and I will plan to visit this site late 
next week (week of June 25th) with another ACSA environmental compliance employee.
 
I will update you as I obtain additional information.
 
Thanks,
 
Tim
 
From: Turner, Robert (DEQ) [mailto:Robert.Turner@deq.virginia.gov]  
Sent: Thursday, June 21, 2012 9:04 AM 
To: Tim Brown 
Cc: Welcher, Jennifer (DEQ); Kain, Donald (DEQ); Flory, Gary (DEQ) 
Subject: RE: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown
 
Hi Tim;
 
At this point, I’ve turned the issue over to our pollution response coordinator, Jennifer Welcher.  
Please include her on any information that you get regarding your findings.   As I mentioned in the 
previous email, it appears to be an intermittent issue, so your work may be cut out for you in 
determining where it’s coming from!
 
Thanks again for your assistance,
 
Ted
From: Tim Brown [mailto:tbrown@serviceauthority.org]  
Sent: Wednesday, June 20, 2012 1:41 PM 
To: Turner, Robert (DEQ) 
Subject: FW: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown
 
Mr. Turner,
 
I received your telephone message of yesterday afternoon, and the additional detail you 
provided with your e-mail below.
 
To the best of our knowledge, all of the businesses in the Riverside Shopping Center obviously 
discharge to the ACSA sanitary sewer system, including the Wilco Hess carwash. However, one 
of our CCTV crews has been directed to film the lateral from the carwash and the facility, in 
general, to see if there is any evidence that discharge to the storm sewer exists. I will report their 
findings to you on Thursday, as well as any other information we may discover.
 
Thanks,
 
Tim 
 
Tim Brown
Environmental Compliance Specialist
Albemarle County Service Authority
168 Spotnap Road
Charlottesville, VA  22911
434-977-4511, x119  
 
From: ACSA mail routing [mailto:mailrouting@serviceauthority.org]  
Sent: Wednesday, June 20, 2012 7:59 AM 
To: tbrown@serviceauthority.org 
Subject: FW: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown
 
 
 
 
From: Turner, Robert (DEQ) [mailto:Robert.Turner@deq.virginia.gov]  
Sent: Tuesday, June 19, 2012 3:51 PM 
To: custserv@serviceauthority.org 
Subject: discharge question, c/o Tim Brown
Sir;
 
I’ve left a message on your voice mail, but decided to go ahead and send a written question as well, 
since I’m frequently away from my desk.
 
We recently received a complaint from a canoeist regarding a foamy discharge coming from a pipe 
approximately 100 m downstream of the bridge on Rt. 29 over the S.F. Rivanna River, on the right 
bank as you face downstream.  An intern and I went out to investigate the complaint, and arrived in 
the area described in the original report at 1100.  We found an approximately 5’ diameter concrete 
pipe in the stream bank, discharging about 10-20 gal/min.  We climbed the bank, and found that the 
pipe was fed by a vertical man-hole about 40-50’ from the outlet on the stream bank.  When we 
returned to the bank at 1115 hrs, we observed the discharge had become much more foamy, with 
rafts of foam covering a couple sq ft, and reaching 6-12” in height.
 
We drove around in that area, and found a car wash at WilcoHess #753 on Seminole  Lane, 
Charlottesville VA 22901.  I was hoping you could tell me what the carwash connects to for 
washwater discharge; is it a sanitary sewer, or do they discharge to the storm sewer?
 
Thanks in advance for any assistance you can provide.
 
Ted Turner  
Regional Biologist  
Valley Regional Office  
VA Dept. of Environmental Quality  
PO Box 3000
Harrisonburg VA 22801  
ph. (540) 574-7858  
fax (540) 574-7878 
 
 
 
